win32/README.md, before:


Files stored in this 'win32' directory are not part of Ada Database Objects.
They are provided to help in building easily the samples provided by ADO.


# MySQL Notes

Compilation with MySQL Windows libraries is not easy since the MySQL connector DLLs are
not ready to use by GCC.   Since I've not found a clear way to make this work, this
directory contains the DLLs and libraries that, after some hard work, were usable for me.

The libmysql.a was generated by executing:

     reimp libmysql.dll

The libmysql.dll should be copied in a bin directory (in the PATH).
The libmysql.a and libmysql.lib should be copied in the GNAT lib directory.

The MySQL dll files come from MySQL Connector 6.0.2.
Download them at: http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/

# SQLite Notes

The SQLite DLLs are provided for convenience (win32 version 3.21.0).

The files should be copied in a directory in the PATH.

Download them at: http://www.sqlite.org/download.html


#Installation for GNAT 2017

If your GNAT 2017 compiler is installed in C:/GNAT/2017, you may
install the MySQL and SQLite libraries by using msys cp with:

     cp win32/*.dll C:/GNAT/2017/bin
     cp win32/*.dll C:/GNAT/2017/lib
     cp win32/*.lib C:/GNAT/2017/lib
     cp win32/*.a C:/GNAT/2017/lib

Commit message:

Integrate Windows 32/64 SQLite libraries to help the installation

win32/README.md, after:


Files stored in this 'win32' directory are not part of Ada Database Objects.
They are provided to help in building easily the samples provided by ADO.


# MySQL Notes

Compilation with MySQL Windows libraries is not easy since the MySQL connector DLLs are
not ready to use by GCC.   Since I've not found a clear way to make this work, this
directory contains the DLLs and libraries that, after some hard work, were usable for me.

The libmysql.a was generated by executing:

     reimp libmysql.dll

The libmysql.dll should be copied in a bin directory (in the PATH).
The libmysql.a and libmysql.lib should be copied in the GNAT lib directory.

The MySQL dll files come from MySQL Connector 6.0.2.
Download them at: https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/

# SQLite Notes

The SQLite DLLs are provided for convenience (win32 and win64 version 3.29.0).
For Windows 32-bit, extract the files:

     cd win32 && unzip sqlite-dll-win32-x86-3290000.zip

For Windows 64-bit, extract the files:

     cd win32 && unzip sqlite-dll-win64-x64-3290000.zip

The files should be copied in a directory in the PATH.

You may download them at: https://www.sqlite.org/download.html


#Installation for GNAT 2019

If your GNAT 2019 compiler is installed in C:/GNAT/2019, you may
install the MySQL and SQLite libraries by using msys cp with:

     cp win32/*.dll C:/GNAT/2019/bin
     cp win32/*.dll C:/GNAT/2019/lib
     cp win32/*.lib C:/GNAT/2019/lib
     cp win32/*.a C:/GNAT/2019/lib
